kubernetes -> container orchestration (co-ordinating and managing multiple services, application or tasks to achieve a desired outcome) tool

advantages ->
minimal to no downtime
scalibility or high performance
disaster recovery - backup and restore

Node -> simple server or a virtual machine

Pod  -> smalles units of k8 and abstraction over container, usually 1 application per pods, each pod gets its own ip address

service -> permanent ip address, lifecycle of pods and service are not connected

Ingres -> mapped ip + port to a domain name, so first request comes to ingress , and then it forwarded it  to service

configMap -> external configuration of application
secret -> same as config map, but put credentials in base 64 formats

	let say we have a endpoint to denote some application, but because of some issue now you want to change it
	but changing it require to redeploy your app, because you pull all cofiguration in yourapp, to overcome this
	problem, we put settings into configMap of k8s


volumes -> Adds a storage to cluster, if pod crashes data are still persisted

Deployments -> buleprint for pods, abstraction on top of pods

StatefulSet -> it is designed for applications that require stable, persistent storage, such as databases. It ensures that each pod in the StatefulSet has a unique, stable identity (hostname) and consistent, persistent storage across pod restarts

Kublets ->
	kublet interact with both, the container and node
	kublet starts the pod with a container inside

Kube proxy -> forwards the requests

container runtime ->  The container runtime is the underlying software that actually runs the containers. Kubernetes uses this runtime to manage containers on each node.

3 Node processes on worker Node ->>
	1) kublet
	2) kube proxy
	3) container runtime


Master Node ->
	processes of Master Node ->
		Api Server -> query made to cluster

		Schedulers -> where to create new pod, based on resouce available

		controller Manager -> manages different controllers to handle various tasks, including reschedulin
                failed  pods, managing jobs, and ensuring replicas  

		etcd -> is a distributed key-value store that serves as the backbone (brain) of the cluster. 
         	stores all the cluster data, including information about the state of pods, nodes, services, and more


Minikube ->
	creaete virtual box on your laptop
	node runs in that virtual box
	1 node k8s cluster
	for testing purpose
	worker and master process on same node

kubectls -> 
	a cli tool to manage k8s cluster

Layers of Abstraction------->
	-> deployment manages a replica set
	-> replicaset manages pods
	-> pod is an abstraction of container
	-> continer

ReplicaSet -> it is a Kubernetes resource that ensures a specified number of pod replicas are running at any given time. It maintains the desired number of pod instances, replacing any that fail or are deleted. ReplicaSets are typically used to ensure high availability and scaling of applications by distributing load across multiple instances of the same pod.


kubernets has two type of config file



1. service -------->

A Service in Kubernetes is an abstraction that defines a logical set of pods and a policy for accessing them. It provides a stable endpoint (IP address and port) for a set of pods, even as individual pods come and go due to scaling, updates, or failures. Services ensure that traffic is reliably routed to the correct pods.

Types of Services:
ClusterIP (default): Exposes the service only within the cluster.
NodePort: Exposes the service on a static port on each node of the cluster.
LoadBalancer: Exposes the service externally via a cloud provider’s load balancer.
ExternalName: Maps the service to a DNS name external to the cluster.


apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: my-service
spec:
  selector:
    app: my-app
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 80
      targetPort: 8080
  type: ClusterIP



2. Deployment ------------------------->

A Deployment is a Kubernetes resource that manages ReplicaSets and provides declarative updates to your application. It ensures that a specified number of pod replicas are running and enables you to perform rolling updates, rollbacks, and scaling.

Deployments make it easy to manage and update applications without downtime, and they support versioning of applications.

Features of a Deployment:
Rolling Updates: Gradually replaces old versions of pods with new ones.
Rollback: Easily revert to a previous version of an application in case of issues.
Scaling: Increase or decrease the number of pod replicas.
Self-Healing: Automatically replaces failed pods.


apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: my-deployment
spec:
  replicas: 3
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: my-app
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: my-app
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: my-container
        image: my-app-image:v1
        ports:
        - containerPort: 8080



	
	










 





 



